docs/recipes/ssh-to-host.md, before:

---
alias: SSH to Host
---
# SSH to Host

This recipe shows how to SSH to a remote host using Keycutter.

## Prerequisites

- Keycutter installed and configured
- A FIDO SSH key created with Keycutter
- Remote host accessible via SSH

## Steps

### 1. Create SSH Key for Host (if needed)

```shell
# Create a key for the remote host
keycutter create remote.example.com_alex@yubikey
```

### 2. Copy Public Key to Remote Host

```shell
# Use traditional ssh-copy-id with your new key
ssh-copy-id -o RemoteCommand=none -i ~/.ssh/keycutter/keys/remote.example.com_alex@yubikey remote.example.com
```

### 3. Connect to Remote Host

```shell
# Connect using standard SSH command
ssh remote.example.com
```

Keycutter will automatically:
- Use the correct SSH key
- Handle YubiKey touch requests
- Forward SSH agent if configured for the host

## Troubleshooting

### Check Which Keys Would Be Offered

```shell
# See which keys would be offered to the host
keycutter authorized-keys remote.example.com
```

### Debug SSH Connection

```shell
# Show detailed SSH config for host
ssh -v remote.example.com
```

### Common Issues

1. **Key not offered to host:**
   - Ensure key filename matches Keycutter's SSH Keytag format
   - Check key permissions (should be 600)

2. **YubiKey not responding:**
   - Ensure YubiKey is inserted
   - Check if PIN is required
   - Try removing and reinserting YubiKey

3. **Permission denied:**
   - Verify public key was copied correctly to remote host
   - Check remote ~/.ssh/authorized_keys permissions
   - Ensure remote user has correct permissions

## See Also

- [SSH Keytags](../design/ssh-keytags.md)
- [Defense Layers](../design/defense-layers-to-protect-against-key-misuse.md)
- [SSH Agent Management](../ssh-agent.md)

Commit message:

docs: Update SSH key installation instructions with `sort -u` to remove duplicates

docs/recipes/ssh-to-host.md, after:

---
alias: SSH to Host
---
# SSH to Host

This recipe shows how to SSH to a remote host using Keycutter.

## Prerequisites

- Keycutter installed and configured
- A FIDO SSH key created with Keycutter
- Remote host accessible via SSH

## Steps

### 1. Create SSH Key for Host (if needed)

```shell
# Create a key for the remote host
keycutter create remote.example.com_alex@yubikey
```

### 2. Copy Public Key to Remote Host

Use `ssh-copy-id` with `keycutter authorized-keys` to install your public keys on the remote host. You'll likely need to authenticate with a password for this initial setup:

```shell
# Copy the appropriate public keys to the remote host (will prompt for password)
keycutter authorized-keys remote.example.com | sort -u | ssh-copy-id -o PreferredAuthentications=password -o RemoteCommand=none -i - remote.example.com
```

This combines:
- `keycutter authorized-keys`: Outputs the public keys that should be authorized
- `sort -u`: Removes any duplicate keys from the output  
- `-i -`: Reads the public keys from stdin
- `-o PreferredAuthentications=password`: Forces password authentication
- `-o RemoteCommand=none`: Disables Keycutter's remote setup command which would fail before keys are installed

### 3. Connect to Remote Host

```shell
# Connect using standard SSH command
ssh remote.example.com
```

Keycutter will automatically:
- Use the correct SSH key
- Handle YubiKey touch requests
- Forward SSH agent if configured for the host

## Troubleshooting

### Check Which Keys Would Be Offered

```shell
# See which keys would be offered to the host
keycutter authorized-keys remote.example.com
```

### Debug SSH Connection

```shell
# Show detailed SSH config for host
ssh -v remote.example.com
```

### Common Issues

1. **Key not offered to host:**
   - Ensure key filename matches Keycutter's SSH Keytag format
   - Check key permissions (should be 600)

2. **YubiKey not responding:**
   - Ensure YubiKey is inserted
   - Check if PIN is required
   - Try removing and reinserting YubiKey

3. **Permission denied:**
   - Verify public key was copied correctly to remote host
   - Check remote ~/.ssh/authorized_keys permissions
   - Ensure remote user has correct permissions

## See Also

- [SSH Keytags](../design/ssh-keytags.md)
- [Defense Layers](../design/defense-layers-to-protect-against-key-misuse.md)
- [SSH Agent Management](../ssh-agent.md)
